Docs 2.0 content technical review (#676)
graknlabs/docs: 0001-typedb/01-start/04-iam-schema.md

Reviewer: @sam-butcher : Please perform technical review.

</div>

<div class="note">
[Note]
The Identity and Access Management database [schema](03-quickstart.md#prepare-a-tql-file) and accompanying 
[dataset](03-quickstart.md#insert-data) described here are used in most examples throughout TypeDB documentation, 
including the [Quickstart guide](03-quickstart.md).
</div>

## Overview

As with any [TypeDB schema](../02-dev/02-schema.md), the IAM schema consists of:

- Types
  - Entity types
  - Relation types
  - Attribute types
- Rules

The [schema](../02-dev/02-schema.md) page will later provide more information to better understand the 
terminology of TypeDB schemas.

The main entity types in the IAM schema:

- Subject — Active entity in the _system_ that performs operations on objects. 
  - User — Human or IT entity possibly interacting with the _system_ from outside of the _system_ boundary.
    - Person — User with `credentials`, `email`, and `full-name` attributes.
  - User-group — A group of users that share the same role.
- Object — Passive entity in the _system_, that contains or receives information, and upon which subjects perform
  operations. 
  - Resource — Anything usable or consumable in the _system_.

>     - File — File in some filesystem with `path` (to the file) and `size` (in KB) attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - File — File in some filesystem with `path` (to the file) and `size-kb` (file size in kB) attributes.
```

>   - Resource-collection — A collection of resources on which the same operations can be performed.

Reviewer 2: This is not correct. A resource collection is only a grouping of resources. It is fine to have multiple resources within a collection that have different valid operations. The insertion of `accesses` by the user define valid operations on a case-by-case basis (this can be somewhat automated), and these are irrespective of object hierarchy.

Author: That is done by analogy with user-groups. If user-groups combine users with the same role, then what is the factor of combining resources together? The most logical assumption is to combine objects by how they can be accessed. So if a user-group is being used to combine multiple users in a single permission assignment, then a resource-collection can be used to combine multiple resources in a single access assignment.

Also, both of them might be used otherwise. Maybe we can add the word "should" instead of can?

Reviewer 2: Consider if you have a file hierarchy originating from a root directory. If you were to follow this rule, every object (both resource and collection) would have to have the same set of valid operations. This is trivially unfeasible as the `create file` operation is valid for a directory but not a file, and the root directory contains both. If you have multi-typed object (e.g. an object that is both a file and an invoice), then these would have to be segregated into different collections by this rule.

Author: The idea was not to set equal permissions but to be able to set permission for a whole group. Like `view` all objects that are in the root directory.
The fact that we can set access to a whole resource-collection (and all its members) doesn't mean we must do it always. The original description seems inaccurate now. Probably because the user-group description uses the vague term "role" instead of "the same permissions" (as per analogy).
I think I'll demote resource-collection to be just for grouping, but the general idea remains the same - the use case of this grouping is pretty much the same as with users IMHO. So we can set things like access, ownership, etc. to a group, instead of every member of a group. It looks lacking if we don't explain how we should use the groups.

```suggestion
  - Resource-collection — A group of resources.
```

- Action — An operation or operation set that can be performed on a specific type of object. Its name is stored in

>   the `action-name` attribute.

Reviewer 2: This has been changed from `action-name` to `name`.

<div class="note">
[Note]
In the list above some entities have attributes that are mentioned in their description.
</div>

> The main relation types in the IAM schema:

Reviewer 2: I would also add memberships and ownerships to this list (if you use them at all).

Author: Why would we do that? They are not nearly as important as the two below.

Reviewer 2: Because permission inference is massively dependent on memberships. Admittedly, ownerships don't actually do much at the moment so it should be fine to neglect them at this early stage in the explanation.

Author: > Because permission inference is massively dependent on memberships. 

Not in my dataset. I don't use inference outside the single rule I have added. So, no membership is needed for documentation purposes. Whether we need to explain the whole schema for users — I don't think we need it right now. It will make our explanation page overcomplicated. And it's in the getting started section, so it needs to be as simple as possible.

Reviewer 2: Yep that's fair enough. Didn't realise you don't use memberships.

- Permission — A relation that relates a subject to a specific access.
- Access — A relation that relates an object to a valid action performed on it.

The types mentioned above combined together in a schema will look like this:

![IAM core schema](../../images/iam/simplified.png)

The illustration above is not the full IAM schema but only the most important part of it. The least important parts
have been omitted from the image to reduce the complexity of the schema. For a full version, please see the image in
the [Full schema](#full-schema) section below.

## Permission and Access relations

One of the core elements of the IAM schema is the relations between `subject` and `object` entity types that allow  
to set `permissions` to access something.

There are two relation types involved:

- `permission`
- `access`

> The `permission` relation connects a `subject` (e.g. `person`) via a `permitted-subject` role and `access` relation via 

Reviewer 2: All role names have been shortened to one-word as per IAM code review. Please see schema in IAM project. I would also potentially mention accesses before permissions and explain why they exist (to define what operations can be performed on each object). Otherwise it might feel a bit confusing.

`permitted-access` role.

> The `access` relation connects an `object` (e.g. `file`) via an `accessed-object` role, `action` (e.g. `view_file`) via 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `access` relation connects an `object` (e.g. `file`) via an `accessed-object` role, `action` (e.g. `"view file"`) via 
```

Author: WTF? Why would I change the name, stored in my dataset? You said you don't use it anymore. And why would I need the quotes? All quotable values are always written as an `inline code-block`. Please explain what was the intention.

Reviewer 2: The underscore and lack of quotes potentially create ambiguity in what `view_file` actually is. Your original sentence could be read as `view_file` being a subtype of `action` rather than as the name of an action. `"view file"` is definitely a string.

Author: I have rewritten this fragment.

It has all the attributes the `object` supertype has and also two attributes of its own:

- `path` — the path to the file on the filesystem
- `size-kb` — the size of the file in KB

## Subject subtypes

The `subject` is a subtype of the base `entity` type with multiple subtypes of its own:

- Subject
  - User
    - Person
  - User-group
    - Business-unit
    - User-account
    - User-role

### Person entity

The `person` type is not a direct subtype of the `subject` type. It is a subtype of the `user` type, that is a direct 
subtype of the `subject` type. That also makes the `person` type a subtype of the `subject` type.

But the `user` subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the `subject` type.

The `person` type plays the same roles as the `subject` supertype.

It has all the attributes the subject supertype has and also two attributes of its own:

- `full-name` — the full name of the person. Usually includes first name and last name.
- `email` — the e-mail address of the person.

## Action entity

The `action` is an abstract type (a subtype of the base `entity` type) that has three attributes:

- `action-name`
- `object-type`

> - `parent-company`

Reviewer 2: Consider if you want to be talking about companies at all?

Additionally, `action` can play a role in multiple relations:

- `access` relation as role `valid-action`
- `company-membership` as role `company-member`
- `segregation-policy` as role `segregated-action`
- `set-membership` as role `set-member`

Finally, `action` has two subtypes, which are not abstract, so we can create instances of those subtypes:

> - `operation` — a single action type that can be performed with an object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `operation` — a single action that can be performed on an object
```

> - `operation-set` — a set of actions that can be performed with an object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `operation-set` — a set of actions that can be performed on an object
```

There are multiple rules in the schema that can be used in different situations and queries.

1. `attribute-parent-company`
2. `automatic-member-collection`
3. `automatic-root-collection`
4. `transitive-membership`
5. `transitive-object-access`
6. `transitive-action-access`
7. `transitive-subject-permission`
8. `transitive-object-permission`
9. `transitive-action-permission`
10. `automatic-segregation-violation`
11. `automatic-permission-invalidity`
12. `automatic-permission-validity`
13. `add-view-permission`

### add-view-permission rule

This simple rule illustrates basic inference. More information on rules can be found in the 
[schema](../02-dev/02-schema.md#rules) documentation page.

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
define

rule add-view-permission:
when {
    $modify isa action, has action-name "modify_file";
    $view isa action, has action-name "view_file";
    $ac_modify (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $modify) isa access;
    $ac_view (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $view) isa access;
    (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_modify) isa permission;
} then {
    (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_view) isa permission;
};
```

> The `when` clause defines the following conditions:

Reviewer 3: The numbered list looks like a paraphrasing of the rule and doesn't particularly help me understand the intent.
I prefer the sentences we usually use to describe the intent of the rule:

> If $view the "view_file" action, and $modify is the "modify-file" action:  
Whenever a subject `$subj` has access to has permissions to the access (`$modify` on `$obj`), then `$subj` also has permission to the access ($view on $obj), provided both $view and $modify are valid access modes on $obj.

I've also noticed the language in the declarative paradigm tends to avoid any mention of assignments.

Author: We have a whole dedicated section called Explanation down there, that does that in detail. The numbered list is practically explaining every line, yes. We need both here because it's not just an example.
Not sure what you mean by Assignments. Assigning some value to a variable?

Reviewer 3: Yes. They usually use `unify` rather than `assign`. But that's not a common term outside of it.

Author: > Yes. They usually use `unify` rather than `assign`. But that's not a common term outside of it.

That would be confusing as F*ork* to use `unify` instead of assign. I suggest we stick to assign for now. I double-checked and it looks like all instances of assign are pretty much straightforward. Shouldn't cause any confusion as it is right now IMHO.

BTW, All we do here with variables is just assign them in the context of this particular query. Nothing persistent.

  - Resource-collection — A group of resources.
- Action — An operation or operation set that can be performed on a specific type of object. Its name is stored in
  the `name` attribute.

<div class="note">
[Note]
In the list above some entities have attributes that are mentioned in their description.
</div>

The main relation types in the IAM schema:

- Permission — A relation that relates a subject to a specific access.
- Access — A relation that relates an object to a valid action performed on it.

The types mentioned above combined together in a schema will look like this:

![IAM core schema](../../images/iam/simplified.png)

The illustration above is not the full IAM schema but only the most important part of it. The least important parts
have been omitted from the image to reduce the complexity of the schema. For a full version, please see the image in
the [Full schema](#full-schema) section below.

## Permission and Access relations

One of the core elements of the IAM schema is the relations between `subject` and `object` entity types that allow  
to set `permissions` to access something.

There are two relation types involved:

- `permission`
- `access`

> The `permission` relation connects a `subject` (e.g. `person`) via a `subject` role and `access` relation via 
> `access` role.
> 
> The `access` relation connects an `object` (e.g. `file`) via an `object` role, `action` (e.g. `view_file`) via 
> the `action` role, and plays a role of `access` in a `permission` relation.

Author: ```suggestion
The `permission` relation connects a `subject` (e.g. an instance of a `person` type) via a `subject` role
and a  relation of the `access` type via an `access` role.

The `access` relation connects an `object` (e.g. an instance of the `file` type) via 
an `object` role, `action` (e.g. an instance of `action` type with `name` attribute of `view_file`) 
via the `action` role, and plays a role of `access` in a `permission` relation.
```

The `file` type plays the same roles as the `object` supertype.

It has all the attributes the `object` supertype has and also two attributes of its own:

- `path` — the path to the file on the filesystem
- `size-kb` — the size of the file in KB

## Subject subtypes

The `subject` is a subtype of the base `entity` type with multiple subtypes of its own:

- Subject
  - User
    - Person
  - User-group
    - Business-unit
    - User-account
    - User-role

### Person entity

The `person` type is not a direct subtype of the `subject` type. It is a subtype of the `user` type, that is a direct 
subtype of the `subject` type. That also makes the `person` type a subtype of the `subject` type.

But the `user` subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the `subject` type.

The `person` type plays the same roles as the `subject` supertype.

It has all the attributes the subject supertype has and also two attributes of its own:

- `full-name` — the full name of the person. Usually includes first name and last name.
- `email` — the e-mail address of the person.

## Action entity

> The `action` is an abstract type (a subtype of the base `entity` type) that has three attributes:

Author: ```suggestion
The `action` is an abstract type (a subtype of the `entity` base type) that has three attributes:
```

- `name`
- `object-type`

> - `parent-company-name`

Author: ```suggestion
```

Additionally, `action` can play a role in multiple relations:

- `access` relation as role `action`

> - `company-membership` as role `member`

Author: ```suggestion
```
